=head1 NAME

kalu - Keeping Arch Linux Up-to-date

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<kalu> [I<OPTION>...]

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-a, --auto-checks>

Run automatic checks (no GUI, see L<B<NOTES>|/NOTES> below)

=item B<-m, --manual-checks>

Run manual checks (no GUI, see L<B<NOTES>|/NOTES> below)

=item B<-d, --debug>

Enable debug mode. Debugging messages will then be sent to kalu's stdout,
prefixed with a timestamp.

Specify twice to include messages from ALPM; three times to include debugging
messages from ALPM.

=item B<-V, --version>

Show version information and exit

=item B<-h, --help>

Show a little help text and exit

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<kalu> is (yet another) upgrade notifier for Arch Linux. Once started, it
will add an icon into your systray, and regularly check if any upgrade is
available, and if so show a notification to inform you about it.

You can know whether anything was found during kalu's last check or not by
its icon: if gray nothing was found. If blue, you can mouse over it to see (in
the tooltip) what was found.

If the icon happens to blink from gray to blue, it means kalu is currently busy.

See L<B<ICONS>|/ICONS> below for more about how icons are created in kalu.

kalu can also be paused, meaning automatic checks will not be ran anymore until
automatic checks are resumed, either through manual action, or automatically
when then "paused period" ends (see L<B<PREFERENCES>|/PREFERENCES> below).

kalu can check for a few things, each one resulting in a separate
notification (if something is found) :

=over

=item B<* Upgrades>

kalu will check for upgrades of any of the installed packages, similarly to
what a `pacman -Syu` would do. To do so, kalu does not requires root
privileges to do its checking. In order to determine whether or not upgrades
are available, it uses temporary copies of your sync databases and
synchronize those copies. (Those are also used when running simulations.)

That way not only can all this be done as user, but it avoids putting you
in a situation where you'd risk messing up your system, as you might otherwise
unknowingly end up basically doing a `pacman -Sy foobar` (which is pretty
generally understood to be a bad idea).

(Because if your databases were synchronized and upgrades were available,
yet you did not upgrade right away - e.g. because you didn't see the
notification or were busy on something - then your next -S operation would
really be a -Sy even though you might not even realize it.)

The first time kalu needs temporary databases, it will create a temporary
folder and set it up. This folder will then B<not> be removed until kalu ends,
thus allowing to re-use those temporary copies for further checks/simulations,
reducing bandwidth usage and therefore speeding things a bit.

(Note kalu will actually remove the folder & re-create new temporary copies in a
new folder if the DB path for ALPM (e.g. from pacman.conf) changed. Alse note
that if for some reason you wanted kalu to recreate copies, you can simply
remove the folder, I<$TMPDIR/kalu-XXXXXX>)

=item B<* Watched packages>

kalu will check for upgrades of packages that aren't currently installed.
This is done by simply maintaining a list of packages (name & version) and
checking it against the online repos (after synchronization).

When upgrades are available, you will be able to easily "mark them" - i.e.
kalu can auto-update the list with the latest version number. You will of
course be able to select which of the packages to update, if any.

If so, and a newer version is available, you will be notified. If you have
foreign packages which you know are not in the AUR (and therefore checking
for them is useless), you can put them on an ignore list, see L<B<PREFERENCES>|/PREFERENCES>
below.

As a special trick, it is possible to specify a package name in the form
"repo/package" to have kalu specificaly check for that package in that repo.

For instance, if using I<testing> as repo that comes first, you may want to keep
an eye on a package, e.g. I<pacman>, from the I<core> repo. Using
I<core/pacman> as package name will allow that.

Note that in that case the name of the package - i.e. B<$PKG> in templates -
will remain in the form I<repo/package> to indicate the restriction.

=item B<* AUR packages>

kalu will compile the list of foreign packages on the system (i.e. not found
in any repo, or what you'd have from running `pacman -Qm`) and check to see
if they are available in the AUR. If so, it will check whether the AUR
version is more recent than the one installed.

You can of course specify a list of packages to ignore, so as not to check the
AUR for packages you know won't be found. kalu will also notify you of any
packages not found in the AUR, to alert you that a package might have been
renamed/removed.

=item B<* Watched AUR packages>

Just as with "official" packages, you can maintain a list of non-installed
packages that kalu should check the AUR for.

=item B<* Arch Linux News>

kalu will check the news from the Arch Linux website (L<http://www.archlinux.org>)
and show a notification whenever something new has been posted.

The notification can only feature titles, but using the button "Show news"
will show the complete news. Note that this is done through kalu's own
rendering (i.e. there is no HTML engine used) and as such the rendering
might differ.
For example, images are not supported.

Links are opened using the command-line specified in B<PREFERENCES>, by default
using B<xdg-open(1)> to be opened them in your default browser.

In case your notification daemon doesn't support action buttons on
notifications, you can still easilly mark news read using the menu "Show unread
Arch Linux News" from right-clickig on kalu's systray icon.

=back

=head1 ICONS

kalu uses 4 versions of its icon in the systray, based on its current state. The
regular (blue) icon indicates that upgrades were found during the last checks,
the gray version indicates that nothing was found; Both versions exists with a
pause symbol on top, when kalu is paused.

If the icon happens to blink from gray to blue, it means kalu is currently busy.

kalu tries to load all icons from the current theme, thus allowing you to
override any (and all) of them as you wish. The main icon is "kalu", the paused
version "kalu-paused", the gray versions are "kalu-gray" and "kalu-gray-paused"
respectively.

So to e.g. use a different gray icon, one could simply put a file
I<kalu-gray.png> in a folder such as I<~/.local/share/icons/hicolor/32x32/apps>
or similar.

Of course, kalu will still create the gray and/or paused versions as needed,
based on loaded icons.

Note that the regular icon is also used elsewhere in kalu, e.g. in buttons or
menus.

=head1 SEND COMMANDS TO KALU VIA FIFO

On start, kalu will create a FIFO named I<kalu_fifo_XXXX> (where XXXX is kalu's
process ID) under the user's runtime directory (I<$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR>).

It is possible to send kalu "commands" simply by writing to this FIFO. Commands
are simple text strings, followed by a new-line character (\n).

Note that it is possible for some commands to, at times, be no-op. For example,
sending a command to start a sysupgrade while kalu is running its check will do
nothing.

Supported commands are:

=over

=item B<run-checks> (or B<manual-checks>)

Run the manual checks, same as using menu "Check for Upgrades..."

=item B<auto-checks>

Run the automatic checks. This is usually only triggered by kalu and cannot
otherwise be triggered manually (except using the I<--auto-checks> command line
argument).

=item B<show-last-notifs>

Re-show last notifications.

=item B<toggle-pause>

Pause/resume automatic checks.

=item B<sysupgrade>

Start a system upgrade. Like using menu "System upgrade..." the actual action
(e.g. run kalu's updater, or start a command line) depends on your preferences.

=item B<run-simulation>

Start an upgrade simulation. This is mostly useful in case of conflicts, to
preview what causes it & how to resolve it prior to any upgrade/database
synchronisation.

See L<B<UPGRADE SIMULATION>|/UPGRADE SIMULATION> below for more.

=item B<show-unread-news>

Show unread Arch Linux news

=item B<show-recent-news>

Show recent Arch Linux news

=item B<popup-menu>

Pops up the systray menu at current mouse pointer position.

=back

=head1 DATA LOCATION & FORMAT

Every setting/data kalu stores will be done in folder F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/kalu>,
all files following a simple format of B<Key = Value>

The following files are used :

=over

=item - I<kalu.conf> : your preferences

This files uses B<[sections]>, as common in conf/INI files. The main section
[options] defines the preferences, other sections define the different
templates : [template-upgrades], [template-watched], [template-aur],
[template-watched-aur] and [template-news]

Each of those support the same keys: I<TitleSce>, I<Title>, I<PackageSce>,
I<Package>, I<SepSce> and I<Sep> See L<B<PREFERENCES>|/PREFERENCES> below for
more.

=item - I<watched.conf> : the list of watched packages

=item - I<watched-aur.conf> : the list of watched AUR packages

A simple list of watched (AUR) packages, where keys are the packages names,
and values the version numbers.

=item - I<news.conf> : information about which news you have already read

The news has a key I<Last> containing the title of the last read news. Every
news from this one on is considered read. When there are a mix of read & unread
news before, the key I<Read> can be specified as many times as needed to
indicate read news (using the news title as value as well).

For example:

=over

=item Last=News 5

=item Read=News 1

=item Read=News 3

=back

Will have "News 2" and "News 4" unread.

=back

=head1 PREFERENCES

Preferences are presented under a few tabs. Most of those represent a type of
check/notification supported by kalu, and as such include a template definition
allowing you to tweak the content of said notifications.

All templates are made of 3 fields: Title, Package (or News item), and Separator.
B<Title> will be the title of the notification. B<Package> is the text
corresponding to one package/news item. It will be repeated for each
package/news item, separated using B<Sep>, to make the body of the notification.

Each field can make use of none, one or more variables. They are not the same
for all templates, so they'll be described in each of them below.

In addition to \n for a new line, you can use some markup tags, but only in
the body of the notification (i.e. in the fields B<Package/News item> and
B<Separator> but not in B<Title>), such as <b> ... </b> for bold, <i> ... </i>
for italic or <u> ... </u> for underline.

Note that though support is recommended, whether or not those will actually be
applied on the notifications depends on your notification daemon.

For each of the fields, a "source" to use must be defined. Title fields
(B<TitleSce> option) can either use B<DEFAULT> or B<CUSTOM> as source. The
former will use an internal default value, the later use whatever is specified
as option B<Title>.

For other fields (B<PackageSce> and B<SepSce> options) it can be one of
B<DEFAULT>, B<FALLBACK>, B<CUSTOM> or B<NONE>. All those fields have a default
and/or a fallback, i.e. not always both.

The fallback source means that the value of the same field from another template
will be used. Template fallbacks are recursive and work as such:

- Upgrades : No fall back
- Watched : falls back to Upgrades
- AUR: falls back to Upgrades
- AUR not found : falls back to Upgrades
- Watched AUR : falls back to AUR
- News : falls back to Upgrades

When a template has a field using B<FALLBACK> as source, the value from its fall
back template will be used (which can also come from its own fallback template).

Note that custom values are required. When a field is optional, a source B<NONE>
will be available. Obviously, titles are required.

Use B<NONE> as source for B<Package> will result in a notification with only a
title (no body/text).


Preferences are presented under the following tabs :

=head2 General

=over

=item I<Configuration file (pacman.conf)>

=item PacmanConf = /path/to/file

This is the configuration file used to initialize the Arch Linux Package
Management (ALPM) library (whose most famous front end is no other than
pacman).

=item I<Icon used on notifications>

=item NotificationIcon = KALU|NONE|/path/to/file

Specify the icon to be used on notifications. Can be none, kalu's icon or
selecting a file to load it from.

If loading the icon fails, kalu will silently fall back to using it own icon.

=item I<Size of the icon used on notifications>

=item NotificationIconSize = I<size>

Specify the size of the icon used on notifications. The size must be a number
between 8 and 48 (both included).

=item I<Notifications expire after (seconds)>

=item Timeout = I<SECONDS>

The delay after which the notification should expire/be automatically
closed by the daemon. The left-most value will use the default (from
the daemon), while the right-most value will set notifications to never
expires, i.e. they will stay opened until either you manually close them,
or for notifications with an action button until kalu is closed.

=item I<Check for upgrades every (minutes)>

=item Interval = I<MINUTES>

How often must kalu run its automatic check. Select from the list, or
type in what you want.

=item I<Do not check between .. and ..>

=item SkipPeriod = I<HH:MM-HH:MM>

This is e.g. in case you keep your computer on 24/7, yet go to sleep at
some point. It would then make sense that you not want kalu to do its
checks while you're sleeping.

When specifying a "paused period" here, kalu will automatically pause its
automatic checks at the beginning time, and resume them at end time.

You can obviously "overwrite" the period, e.g. by manually resuming automatic
checks during the paused period.

=item I<During an automatic check, check for ..>

=item AutoChecks = [NEWS] [UPGRADES] [WATCHED] [AUR] [WATCHED_AUR]

Select one or more checks that will be performed during every automatic
check, i.e. run on start or at the interval specified above.

=item I<During a manual check, check for ..>

=item ManualChecks = [NEWS] [UPGRADES] [WATCHED] [AUR] [WATCHED_AUR]

Select one or more checks that will be performed when you start a manual
check, i.e. using menu "Check for Upgrades"

=back

=head2 News

=over

=item I<Command line to open links>

=item CmdLineLink = I<cmdline>

The command line to be executed when a link (on news) is clicked. Use variable
B<$URL> as placeholder for the full URL to be opened.

=back

=over

=item I<Notification template>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>   : number of news items

=back

=item News item

=over

=item B<$NEWS> : the title of the news

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back

=back

=head2 Upgrades

=over

=item I<Check for pacman/kalu conflict>

=item CheckPacmanConflict = 0|1

When showing the notification, kalu will check if there's an upgrade of pacman
likely to prevent the system upgrade due to kalu's dependency to the current
version of pacman (i.e. due to API changes in libalpm).

If so, a button will be featured on the notification, to show a little message
about the reason for such a conflict, and how to perform the system upgrade.

=item I<Show a button "Upgrade system" on notifications (and on kalu's menu)>

=item UpgradeAction = KALU|CMDLINE|NONE

Whether or not notifications should feature a button "Upgrade system" and
kalu's menu (right-click on its systray icon) feature an item "System upgrade"

=item I<When clicking the button>

=item (see UpgradeAction above)

Clicking the button can either start kalu's own updater (see L<B<PREFERENCES>|/PREFERENCES>
below), or simply run the program of your choice.

=item I<Command-line>

=item CmdLine = I<cmdline>

The command line to start when pressing the button "Upgrade system" from the
notification. See L<B<SYSTEM UPGRADE>|SYSTEM UPGRADE> below.

=item I<After completing a system upgrade, ask whether to start the following>

=item PostSysUpgrade = I<cmdline>

When using kalu's updater, you can define one or more processes to be ran after
a system upgrade was completed. Specify their command-line in the list, and
they'll be started after a successful system upgrade.

You can use B<$PACKAGES> in the command line, which will be replaced by the
list of all packages involved in the sysupgrade (i.e. packages upgraded, as well
as those added or removed, for instance when a package is replaced by another one).

You can also use B<$PACFILES> in the command line, which will be replaced by the
list of all I<.pacnew> files created during the sysupgrade.

The full /path/to/filename will be followed by an extra parameter consisting of
the package name & old version.

For example, if I</etc/pacman.conf.pacnew> was installed during the upgrade,
while upgrading from 4.1.2-3 to 4.2.0-1 then two parameters will be specified:
    /etc/pacman.conf.pacnew pacman-4.1.2-3

The idea here is that this can allow you to e.g. go look in pacman's cache for
the old version of the file, and perform a 3-way merge.

=item I<Ask confirmation before starting anything>

=item ConfirmPostSysUpgrade = 0|1

If enabled, a confirmation will be asked before any process is started after the
sysupgrade. In case you specify more than one, the full list will be featured
and you will be able to determine which (if any) to start each time.

=item I<Notification template>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>  : the number of packages

=item B<$DL>  : the total download size

=item B<$INS> : the total installed size

=item B<$NET> : the total net (post-install difference) size

=back

=item Package

=over

=item B<$PKG>  : the name of the package

=item B<$DESC> : the description of the package

=item B<$OLD>  : the version number of the currently installed version

=item B<$NET>  : the version number of the version available in the repo

=item B<$DL>   : the download size

=item B<$INS>  : the installed size

=item B<$NET>  : the net (post-install difference) size

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back

=back

=head2 Watched

=over

=item I<Manage watched packages>

Does the same as the menu by the same name, that is open the window to manage
(add, edit, remove) the list of watched packages. This list is independent from
the preferences, its data are saved in a different file, and saving the list will
not have an effect on preferences, and vice versa.

=item I<Notification template>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>  : the number of packages

=item B<$DL>  : the total download size

=item B<$INS> : the total installed size

=item B<$NET> : the total net (post-install difference) size

=back

=item Package

=over

=item B<$PKG>  : the name of the package

=item B<$DESC> : the description of the package

=item B<$OLD>  : the version number from the list of watched packages

=item B<$NET>  : the version number of the version available in the repo

=item B<$DL>   : the download size

=item B<$INS>  : the installed size

=item B<$NET>  : the net (post-install difference) size

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back

=back

=head2 AUR

=over

=item I<Show a button "Update AUR packages" on notifications>

If enabled, notifications for AUR packages will feature a button "Update AUR
packages" which will start the specified command-line. If not, no button will
be featured.

=item I<When clicking the button, run the following>

=item CmdLineAur = I<cmdline>

The command line to start when pressing the button "Update AUR packages" from the
notification. See L<B<SYSTEM UPGRADE>|SYSTEM UPGRADE> below.

You can use B<$PACKAGES> in the command line, which will be replaced by the
list of all packages for which an upgrade is available in the AUR.

=item I<Do not check the AUR for the following packages>

=item AurIgnore = I<PACKAGE>...

By default kalu determines the list of all foreign packages (i.e. not found
in any repo, or what you'd have from running `pacman -Qm`) and check to see
if they are available in the AUR.

If you have packages which you know are not there (or simply for which you do
not want to be notified), simply add their names to this list.

=item I<Notification template>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>  : the number of packages

=back

=item Package

=over

=item B<$PKG>  : the name of the package

=item B<$DESC> : the description of the package

=item B<$OLD>  : the version number of the currently installed version

=item B<$NET>  : the version number of the version available in the AUR

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back


=item I<When packages are not found:>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>  : the number of packages

=back

=item Package

=over

=item B<$PKG>  : the name of the package

=item B<$OLD>  : the version number of the currently installed version

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back

=back

=head2 Watched AUR

=over

=item I<Manage watched AUR packages>

Does the same as the menu by the same name, that is open the window to manage
(add, edit, remove) the list of watched AUR packages. This list is independent
from the preferences, its data are saved in a different file, and saving the list
will not have an effect on preferences, and vice versa.

=item I<Notification template>

=over

=item Title

=over

=item B<$NB>  : the number of packages

=back

=item Package

=over

=item B<$PKG>  : the name of the package

=item B<$DESC> : the description of the package

=item B<$OLD>  : the version number from the list of watched AUR packages

=item B<$NET>  : the version number of the version available in the AUR

=back

=item Separator

No variables available.

=back

=back

=head2 Misc

=over

=item I<Show if databases can be synchronized in tooltip>

=item SyncDbsInTooltip = 0|1

An indication of how many databases can by synchronized (i.e. are not up-to-date)
will be featured on the tooltip, regardless of whether upgrades are available or
not.

=item I<When (double/middle) clicking the systray icon>

=item OnSglClick = I<ACTION>

=item OnDblClick = I<ACTION>

=item OnMdlClick = I<ACTION>

=item OnSglClickPaused = I<ACTION>

=item OnDblClickPaused = I<ACTION>

=item OnMdlClickPaused = I<ACTION>

Defines the action to be done when you single/double/middle click on kalu's
systray icon.

You can define actions to be taken when kalu is active (i.e. not paused), and a
different set of actions when it is paused.

KDE users: See L<B<KDE STATUSNOTIFIERITEM SUPPORT>|/KDE STATUSNOTIFIERITEM SUPPORT>
section below for more information.

=over

=item B<* Same as when active/not paused> ( SAME_AS_ACTIVE )

[Only when kalu is paused] Do the same as when kalu is active (defined above).

=item B<* Do nothing> ( NOTHING )

Does exactly that

=item B<* Check for Upgrades> ( CHECK )

Start a manual check

=item B<* System Upgrade> ( SYSUPGRADE )

Start a system upgrade. This will do the same as using menu "System Upgrade" or
the button "Upgrade system" on notification; i.e. the specified action done
depends on your settings under B<Upgrades>

Note that if no button "Upgrade system" is shown on notification, this option
will have the same effect as B<Do nothing>

=item B<* Upgrade Simulation> ( SIMULATION )

Start an upgrade simulation. This is mostly useful in case of conflicts, to
preview what causes it & how to resolve it prior to any upgrade/database
synchronisation.

See L<B<UPGRADE SIMULATION>|/UPGRADE SIMULATION> below for more.

=item B<* Hide/show opened windows (except kalu's updater)> ( TOGGLE_WINDOWS )

Will hide all opened windows (except for kalu's updater). If at least one
window is hidden, an indication will be featured on the tooltip (" +" next to
"kalu") and triggering the action again will then show all hidden windows.

=item B<* Re-show last notifications...> ( LAST_NOTIFS )

Will re-show all notifications resulting from the last time checks were ran
(automatic or manual).

=item B<* Toggle pause/resume automatic checks> ( TOGGLE_PAUSE )

Will toggle kalu's paused state, pausing or resuming automatic checks.

=item B<* Exit kalu> ( EXIT )

Will exit kalu.

=back

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION TWEAKS

A few configuration options do not have GUI (i.e. cannot be set from the
Preferences window), but can be set manually. They will, of course, be
preserved when saving preferences.

The following tweaks are supported, and can be used in I<kalu.conf> (under the
[options] section) :

=over

=item B<UseIP = 4|6>

This will force kalu to use IPv4 or IPv6. This only applies for connections done
via kalu, i.e. news & AUR, but doesn't apply to ALPM.

This could be usefull e.g. if you're having issue with the AUR timing out when
resolving using IPv6.

=item B<AutoNotifs = 0>

This can be used to disable showing notifications for automatic checks. They
can still be shown on demand, using "re-show last notifications".

Notifications will still be shown for manual checks.

=item B<NotifButtons = 0>

This can be used to not add any buttons to notifications. Can be useful if your
notification daemon decides to show notifications with action-buttons as
non-expiring windows instead (e.g. I<notify-osd>).

=item B<ColorUnimportant = COLOR>

=item B<ColorInfo = COLOR>

=item B<ColorWarning = COLOR>

=item B<ColorError = COLOR>

Allows you to define the colors used in kalu's system upgrade GUI. Those are
used to color log messages of another level than NORMAL. B<ColorInfo> is also
used on columns for download & install sizes, to indicate packages that have
been downloaded/installed, as well as for completion message. B<ColorError> is
also used similarly in case of e.g. download error for a package, or message of
system upgrade failure.

The value I<COLOR> will be parsed as a GdkRGBA color, and can therefore be
either one of:

- A standard name (Taken from the X11 rgb.txt file)

- A hexadecimal value in the form ".rgb", ".rrggbb", ".rrrgggbbb" or
  ".rrrrggggbbbb"

- A RGB color in the form "rgb(r,g,b)" (In this case the color will have full
  opacity)

- A RGBA color in the form "rgba(r,g,b,a)"

Where "r", "g", "b" and "a" are respectively the red, green, blue and alpha
color values. In the last two cases, r g and b are either integers in the range
0 to 255 or precentage values in the range 0% to 100%, and a is a floating point
value in the range 0 to 1.

=item B<AutoShowLog = 1>

This can be used so that the log in kalu's updater is visible by default; Else
the pane is only opened when an important message is added (error, warning or
info) or upon manual trigger.

=back

=head1 KDE STATUSNOTIFIERITEM SUPPORT

Starting with Plasma Next, KDE doesn't support the XEmbed systray anymore[1] in
favor of their own Status Notifier Specification[2].

KDE users can enable StatusNotifierItem support in kalu by specifying the
configure option I<--enable-status-notifier> which also adds an extra dependency
on library statusnotifier[3], for easy support with GObject (GTK+) application.

As a result, kalu will then use this new interface for its icon (only falling
back to the systray if it isn't supported, e.g. no StatusNotifierWatcher is
running/registered on the system).

Using KDE's StatusNotifierItem interface, kalu doesn't show/handle the icon, the
application acting as StatusNotifierHost does. As a result, kalu doesn't react
to whatever click happen on the icon, but predefined methods being called.

Specifically, kalu will respond to method B<Activate>, where the action assigned
to click will be used, and B<SecondaryActivate>, where the action on middle
click will be used. Those are likely to be corresponding to the same click
events, though it's actually up to the StatusNotifierHost (i.e. the application
showing and handling the icons).

Additionally, kalu's menu will obviously be shown on method B<ContextMenu>,
which is likely to be triggered on right-click.

Also note that the tooltip will be different in its look (since handled by the
StatusNotifierHost and not kalu) but also its content, since kalu doesn't know
when it is shown (so it can only include the date/time of last check, not how
long ago it was).

=head2 References

[1] http://blog.martin-graesslin.com/blog/2014/03/system-tray-in-plasma-next/

[2] http://www.notmart.org/misc/statusnotifieritem/

[3] http://jjacky.com/statusnotifier/

=head1 SYSTEM UPGRADE

An item "System Upgrade" on kalu's menu, as well as a button "Upgrade system"
on notifications for available upgrades, can be featured. This button can start
a process of your choice, or kalu's own system upgrader. (See L<B<PREFERENCES>|PREFERENCES>
above.)

=head2 Running a command line (System/AUR upgrade)

You can define a command line for kalu to execute. When running a command line,
whether to perform a system upgrade or an AUR update, kalu will wait until the
process' execution is over, meanwhile remaining in busy state (so no checks can
be started while an upgrade is in progress, as that would be useless, if not
slowing things down).

Once the process has ended, kalu will then automatically run its automatic
checks again, to refresh its state. Note that if you started both a system
upgrade command line and an AUR update command line at the same time, kalu will
remain in busy state until both are done, and only then runs its checks.

Usually, you'll likely start a terminal emulator within which `pacman` or an AUR
helper will do its work; Once done and the terminal closes, kalu will rerun its
checks and everything is done as expected.

=head2 Using kalu's system updater

You can also use kalu's own system updater, which will first synchronize your
databases, then upgrade all packages that are out of date. In other words, it
does what a `pacman -Syu` would do, only in a GTK GUI.

In order to synchronize databases and upgrades packages, root privileges are
obviously required. The way this is handled is as follows: kalu itself only
contains the GUI, and therefore can work running under your (user) account.

The part that does interact with libalpm (to actually synchronize databases and
upgrade packages) is in a secondary library (I<kalu-dbus>), that is the only
one to require root privileges.

This binary will be executed automatically, with root privileges, through DBus
when needed, and PolicyKit will be used to ensure that you are authorized to
upgrade the system.

By default you probably will be prompted for your password in order to be able
to run the system upgrade. Should you want to bypass that, a rule has been
installed which will allow members of the group I<kalu> to perform a sysupgrade
without extra authentication.

All you need to do to use this feature is add yourself to the group (and
re-login).

If you'd rather use another group (e.g. I<wheel>) you can copy the file
I</usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/30-kalu.rules> to I</etc/polkit-1/rules.d> and
modify it as you wish.

Note that the group used by default can actually be set at compile time, through
a I<configure> option.

When upgrading your system with kalu's updater, your log file (e.g. pacman.log,
as defined in pacman.conf) will be updated. kalu adds an entry for each
database synchronized, one when starting the upgrade, one after the upgrade
was completed, and one after each package operation (installed, upgraded,
removed).

Note that a button "Abort" is available during the process. After a
confirmation, this will basically do the same as would hitting B<^C> from your
terminal when running pacman.

Which is to say, doing so when e.g. download packages is fine, the operation
should be cleanly aborted, and downloads can be resumed later on. However, you
probably don't want to do that while the actual system upgrade is being
performed, for obvious reasons.

=head1 UPGRADE SIMULATION

Every once in a while, kalu might not be able to list the available upgrades,
notifying you instead that there is a conflict between some packages. If you
then want to know more about this conflict, and still want to know what upgrades
are available regardless of the conflict, the extra button "Run simulation"
might be of interest to you.

You can also start a simulation at any time from kalu's menu, FIFO or via its
systray icon. If there's no conflict, the simulation will simply consist of
listing the packages to be upgraded, if any.

A simulation is simply running the first step (i.e. compiling packages list) of
kalu's updater on a temporary copy of the (synchronized) databases, in order to
see what the conflicts are.

You will be presented with the usual GUI of kalu's updater, and after answering
the questions to resolve (or not) the conflicts, you'll then be able to see the
full list of available upgrades.

Of course it stops there, there's no upgrading. The point of this is simply to
see how to resolve the conflict, and see what the upgrades are, as there might
be new dependencies to install, old packages to remove/replace, and of course a
few other/unrelated packages with available upgrades.

You can easily start over by pressing "Rerun simulation" to have all the
questions asked again, so you can try different scenario and see which one works
(best) for you.

Once you're done, press "Close" and all temporary files will be removed. That's
it, your system remains unchanged. If you now want to actually do the upgrade,
use "Upgrade system" as usual.

Note that you don't need to use kalu's updater for this to work. Even if e.g.
you have set things to run `pacman -Syu` in a new terminal when pressing
"Upgrade system", or not have the button at all, the "Run simulation"
button/feature will be available.

The only requirement is that kalu's updater was compiled in, of course, i.e. it
won't work if you compiled kalu using `--disable-updater` (or `--disable-gui`).

=head2 Download packages only

One more thing you can use the simulation for, is to only download packages for
the next sysupgrade (without actually performing said sysupgrade).

Once a simulation has completed, a button "Download packages" will be available
(if there are any packages to upgrade/download). After pressing this button you
will need to be authenticated, and after a final confirmation packages will be
downloaded into pacman's cache.

In effect, this is similar to running `pacman -Syuw` but, again, using a
temporary copy of your databases so your databases aren't synced, for the same
reasons previously mentionned.

This can allow you to "pre-download" packages ahead of time, but leaving the
actual sysupgrade to later, maybe when you have more time but less bandwidth
(noting that some remains required, to sync your databases).

=head1 NOTES

Command-line options B<--auto-checks> and B<--manual-checks> both work without
any need for GUI. This means any and all output will be show on stdout/stderr,
and there is no need for a DISPLAY to be available.

In other words, you can run kalu using those options from a tty or through SSH,
and it will work fine. You can also use kalu in a script that way.

Note that GTK+ and other dependencies are obviously still required, although
there is a I<configure> option available to disable all GUI completely during
compilation, in order to produce a CLI version of kalu.

=head1 BUGS

They're probably crawling somewhere in there... if you happen to catch one,
(or more) report it and I'll do my best to squash it.

=head1 REPOSITORY

You can find the latest source code of B<kalu> as well as report bugs and/or
suggest features on its GitHub repository, available at L<https://github.com/jjk-jacky/kalu>

=head1 AUTHORS

=over

=item Olivier Brunel <jjk AT jjacky DOT com>

=item Dave Gamble

=item Pacman Development Team <pacman-dev AT archlinux DOT org>

=back

=head1 ARTWORK

Icon by Painless Rob (L<https://bbs.archlinux.org/viewtopic.php?id=130839>)
